- [Instructor] Eventual consistency is a paramount concept
in distributed data.
We often hear about this model
but never consider that it is achieved
through a mechanism of asynchronous activities.
Before we dig too deep,
we need to understand ACID and BASE.
ACID is a calling card
of relational database management systems.
It is what allows transactional writes
and consistent reads in a database.
ACID, however, becomes painful at best
in a microservices world,
especially in a distributed one.
Atomic transactions are usually
what people think of with ACID,
meaning that the data is either all written
or it isn't.
Of course, the rest of the acronyms are important too,
consistent, isolated and durable.
BASE, however, is a different way of thinking.
We seldom care that the data is written immediately
in a microservices architecture.
We have already broken down the transactional boundaries
with our service domains.
What we do care about is that the data is going
it be there when we need it.
This is the E in BASE, eventual consistency.
For the record, B is basically available
and S is a soft state,
meaning the data shifts and is eventually consistent,
so it is always soft and malleable,
and not durable like an ACID.
And the A is just part of basically.
This eventual consistency model allows us
to speed up writes to a database
with trust that the technology will distribute the data
to wherever it is needed.
Again, this is paramount in distributed computing
when an atomic write across the globe
may time out the client calling the service.
We allow the tooling to do its job
through asynchronous communications.
Now, I'm not going to go into actual algorithms at play
in a tool like Apache Cassandra,
and how it achieves eventual consistency
but I am going to talk about the processing
at a very high level.
We have our distributed database clusters.
In this model, I am sowing a single instance
but usually, this is a cluster,
which will be clear in a moment.
These databases are geographically distributed
across a region or the entire globe.
These databases know about each other,
and in this example, all have the same data.
Sharding is a concept outside the scope of this course,
so we still have full replication.
We have a client that connects
to its regional database for information.
When it writes data, it sends it to the local database
and gets a response that it is written.
Now, at this point,
the other two instances don't have the data,
only A does.
Now, within A,
there may be internal replication of the data,
and really, there should be to ensure that it isn't lost.
This can be asynchronous or synchronous depending
on the configuration.
In Apache Cassandra, for instance,
you can use quorum to determine how many nodes
of the ring needs to have the data
before the acknowledgement is even sent.
But staying at a high level,
let's just ignore how data is replicated internally.
Now, the client goes away with its work
but now the asynchronous messaging
of the database comes into play.
It will use messaging of some form
to replay the state change
to the other two databases.
At some point, they will become consistent.
Now, while this is done through asynchronous communications,
the developer really has nothing to do here.
The tooling does it all.
However, you can achieve similar characteristics
on your own or other systems,
and we'll talk a little bit about that later.
Now, of course, there are a few trades-offs
and while this isn't a course on distributed data,
your microservices architecture needs
to take these into account
because they can directly impact the utilization
of the system.
Latent reads are possible in this model.
If you write data
and then immediately read it,
if you hit a new node in your cluster
or global distribution,
you may not have the data available that you just wrote.
This impacts the design of your microservices in general.
You either need localized caches
to prevent this from happening,
increase the likelihood of data being there
by taking a performance hit through higher quorum counts
or just accept it and build in safeguards.
You also may have to deal with these issues
for longer periods of time.
If communications between distributed systems fails,
the asynchronous communications can also fail.
As such, your microservices architecture
may need to take this into account.
You may need to inject configuration
that allows for a fallback read
from another instance of a database
or load balance globally to prevent issues.
This can be an ugly problem
that isn't easy to solve.
You may also have to deal with catastrophic failures.
You could write data through a data service
and the entire cluster goes down
before distributing the data.
You may not lose the data, though you may.
But regardless, the data may not be available anywhere
for a while at least.
Your systems need to be built as fault tolerant as possible
to help resolve these issues.
Circuit breaker patterns
can often help in this scenario.